These Apple X11 drivers support 1, 8, and 24 bit deep screens on the Macintosh
hardware running A/UX. Multiple screens of any size and both depths are 
accomodated. The 24 bit default visual is DirectColor, and there is
significant color flash when shifting between TrueColor and DirectColor
visuals in 24 bit mode.

To run X you'll need a "network" kernel. Either the B-NET or the NFS kernel
described in the A/UX Release Notes is sufficient. As a check, you must
be able to successfully "rlogin" to A/UX from its own console. This
requirement holds whether or not you have an Ethernet card or connection.

Running the X server and the usual suite of clients requires at least 4MB
of RAM. A 4MB system will thrash if the A/UX kernel tables are too large.
The default table sizes do not lead to thrashing, but if you have adjusted
these sizes using "kconfig" you may wish to restore the moderate default
allocations.

Build the system by:

1)	In the top-level directory, type:

	alias make "make SHELL=/bin/sh"
	make BOOTSTRAPCFLAGS=-DmacII -k World >>& world.log

	This takes several hours.  Many files will generate warnings about
	"enumeration type clashes".  This is a misfeature in the C compiler 
	and can safely be ignored.

2)	As super-user, in the top-level directory, type:

	make -k install

3)	Copy the file /usr/lib/X11/.x11start to your home directory 
	(.x11start invokes the initial clients and determines their
	positions on the screen.) .x11start attempts to use the "twm"
	window manager. You may choose to run another window manager by 
	simply adjusting .x11start.

4)	On the console put /usr/bin/X11, $X11BINDIR, (or whatever else you may
	have chosen for BINDIR in Imake.tmpl) in your search path, and then
	start the server:

	    X11R6 (or X11)

5)	X11R6 should start up an xterm window named "console" that acts as a
	console.  When this xterm terminates, the xinit will kill the server.  
	You can also start up client programs from a terminal or rlogin, 
	but be sure the DISPLAY environment variable is set:

	    setenv DISPLAY unix:0.0
	    xterm &


Many X clients assume the mouse has three buttons. The A/UX X server simulates
the middle and right mouse buttons with keystrokes -- the left-arrow key
generates middle button events, and the right-arrow key generates right button
events -- the real mouse button generates left button events. The 
open-apple or cloverleaf key is the "Meta" modifier, Meta can also be obtained
by pressing the up-arrow key. The down-arrow key duplicates the Control key.
Meta, Control, and Shift are often used in combination with other keystrokes
or mouse clicks. For example, the terminal emulator xterm pops up menus in
response to control-left and control-middle. The original function of the
arrow keys may be obtained by holding down the Option key while pressing
one of the arrow keys. This Option key behavior can be reversed by the
-optionmouse command line option. See the man page for XmacII.
