
                FUJITSU Japanese Language Input Server

                           3 June, 1994


1. Introduction

xfeoak is a Japanese input server developed by FUJITSU LIMTIED.
xfeoak supports both the FrontEnd and BackEnd methods and multiple
dictionaries.  

   * Supporting protocols

         - The Input Method Protocol 
              Version 1.0  X Version 11, Release 6

         - Transport Layer Protocol
              - X Protocol
              - TCP Protocol

   * Supportied conversion engines and dictionaries

         - OAK dictionary (FUJITSU proprietary) 
              (NOTE: Not supported by the current release.)
         - SJ3 dictionary (provided by Sony)

       xfeoak can switch between dictionaries at run time.
   
   * Directories

        This directory contains the following subdirectories:

           sxc/  : source code for romaji-henkan.
           oak/  : source code for accessing the OAK dictionary 
                    (NOTE: Not supported by the current release.)
           sj3/  : source code for accessing the SJ3 conversion engine.
           doc/  : documents (English and Japanese)

This Server has been tested on the following systems:

    FUJITSU DS       7230, 7742  OS: UXP/DS V10L20
    FUJITSU FM-G     1600        OS: SX/G E17
    Sony    NWS-5000             OS: NEWS-OS 6.0.2
    HP      HP9000 S700          OS: HP-UX9.01
    IBM     RS/6000 320H         OS: AIX 3.2.5


2. Compiling and installing xfeoak

(1) Make Makefile for xfeoak

        % imake -I'configration file directory' -DTOPDIR='xc directory path'
                 -DCURDIR='current directory path from xc directory'
               (in this directory)

        You may add the following definitions.

           -DFUJITSU_OAK    : Support OAK dictionary (FUJITSU proprietary)
           -DSJ3_DICTIONARY : Support SJ3 conversion engine (libsj3.a)

        If you don't specify either of the above definitions,
        xfeoak supports only hiragana/katakana conversion.

(2) Link source files under xc/lib/X11 to this directory

        % make includes

(3) Make Makefiles for sub-directories

        % make Makefiles

(4) If necessary,

        % make depend

(5) Make xfeoak in this directory

        % make


3. Note

If you would like to use SJ3, you can specify the following option
when xfeoak is started.

     -uname "user name"
          Specify the user name.  The default is "xfeoak".

4. Bugs

If you find a bug or need any information, please send a bug report or
your question to

     fujiwara@a80.tech.yk.fujitsu.co.jp


5. Credit

I would like to thank the following people for their help and participation
in testing: 

   Hideki Hiura (SunSoft), Yoshio Horiuchi (IBM),
   Makoto Inada (DEC), Hiromu Inukai (SunSoft),
   Hiroyuki Miyamoto (DEC), Hidetoshi Tajima (HP),
   Nobuyuki Tanaka (Sony), Makoto Wakamatsu (Sony) and
   Katsuhisa Yano (Toshiba)

I would also like to offer special thanks to the following members of my 
implementation team:

   Kazuhiro Asakuma, Riki Kawaguchi, Kiyoaki Oya, 
   Makiko Shimamura, Takanori Tateno and Toshimitsu Terazono.



				Takashi Fujiwara     
				FUJITSU LIMITED 
				fujiwara@a80.tech.yk.fujitsu.co.jp

