Xed is an interactive texteditor for X based on the Athena widgets.
The program should be self explaining see the manual page for further
informations.

The program has been tested with X 11 Release 4 and Release 5 on the
following platforms:

	Sun3, SunOs 4.0.3 (use Imakefile.sun3)
        Sun4, SunOs 4.0.3 + SunOs 4.1.1
        Data General Aviion 200, DG/UX Release 4.31 
        GEI C2000
        GEI C3000, RISC/os (UMIPS) 4.52
        NeXT, Mach (Motorola)
        Unix PC, System V/386 Release 3.2 (use Imakefile.386)
	Parsytec Multicluster, Helios 1.2 (use Makefile.hel)
	Linux 1.0

It also has been tested with X 11 Release 6 on the following platforms:

	NeXT, Mach 3.1 (Motorola)

There are still some problems with scrolling performances on Sun3. Therefore
you should compile with -DSCROLLBREAK on this platform (see Imakefile). If
you do so the resource MaxScrollbreak has some effect on text scrolling and
after every linescrolling XFlush is called. Try to find the smallest value
for MaxScrollbreak which is still big enough to stop scrolling right after
releasing the cursor key.
Perhaps you also have to define one of the following Defines:

	-DUSEGETCWD     : Use "getcwd" instead of "getwd"
	-DNORENAME      : Use build in "rename" instead of unix "rename"
	-DUSEDIRENT     : Use "dirent" struct instead of "direct"
        -DUSE_CSH_SYSTEM: Use csh syntax for "system" call.

If you are building for Helios, you will have problems with headerfiles	longer
than 8+3 characters. Parsytec has changed this filenames to work with
MSDOS filesystems (What a stupid idea). Before building make sure that the 
correct filenames are available (use symbolic links in the include directories).
For example the "IntrinsicP.h" Header is named "Intrincsic.Ph".
If your Helios system uses the MSDOS filesystem you have to change some
"#include" in the source code. You will get lots of "warnings" and some
"errors" but no "serious errors" from the Helios compiler. There is an extra
makefile "Makefile.hel" which sets the necessary compiler options. This 
makefile will only work with the GNU make ("gmake"). Imake doesn't work for
Helios.

To comiple the program:

1. Edit Imakefile if necessary (see above)
2. Make a Makefile with imake (xmkmf)
3. Type "make"
4. Type "make install"
5. Type "make install.man"
 

If you like a Motif like look you may want to use the Xaw3d library instead
of Xaw. Simply link the program with -lXaw3d instead of -lXaw and install the
application dafaults Xed3d.ad instead of Xed.ad.

	Randolf Werner
	(evol@infko.uni-koblenz.de)

