/*                            xmove
 *                            -----
 *             A Pseudoserver For Client Mobility
 *
 *   Copyright (c) 1994         Ethan Solomita
 *
 *   The X Consortium, and any party obtaining a copy of these files from
 *   the X Consortium, directly or indirectly, is granted, free of charge, a
 *   full and unrestricted irrevocable, world-wide, paid up, royalty-free,
 *   nonexclusive right and license to deal in this software and
 *   documentation files (the "Software"), including without limitation the
 *   rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense,
 *   and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons who receive
 *   copies from any such party to do so.  This license includes without
 *   limitation a license to do the foregoing actions under any patents of
 *   the party supplying this software to the X Consortium.
 */

	This is the second release of xmove, a pseudoserver for
client mobility. All of the files entitled "README" discuss the
steps to install xmove on your system. All discussion of features
and usage are left in the doc and man subdirectories. Please make
certain to read the README files located in each of the following
subdirectories:

	xmove
	xmove/lib
	xmovectrl

	You should also determine whether you have the most
recent release of xmove. The current release will be available
for anonymous ftp from ftp.cs.columbia.edu:/pub/xmove. The third
release of xmove is anticipated in late 1994/early 1995.

	As of today (June 6, 1994) we have tested xmove on Sun
platforms, using both SunOS 4.1.x and Solaris 2.x. xmove supports
monochrome and color displays, excepting 24-bit color. We expect
that xmove should port easily to other Unix platforms, although
it may be necessary to disable dynamic loading of libraries. See
xmove/README for details.

	The xmove hierarchy consists of the above three
directories which contain source code that must be compiled, a
man directory containing man pages, and a doc directory
containing text files which discuss operating xmove, xmove's
features, and xmove's limitations.

	The directory xmove contains the main source code for
xmove. It contains an Imakefile which should work for most users.
That Imakefile contains a header section which contains options
that must be configured before xmove will compile. The result of
a successful make will be the executable xmove, which is the
pseudoserver.

	The directory xmove/lib contains a support library
(libatommap.c) for xmove which allows xmove to handle many of the
properties and selections defined in the ICCCM and by OpenLook.
Xmove's Imakefile can be configured to compile this source code
into xmove directly, thus not requiring the library to be built.
Although this is functionally equivalent, xmove is designed to
extend its functionality by simply dropping additional libraries
into a specified subdirectory. If xmove is told to load libraries
dynamically, then the library in this directory must be made.

	The directory xmovectrl contains the source code for the
program used to issue commands to xmove (eg. move my xterm to
machine foo). The compilation is straightforward, as the source
consists of one .c file and two header files. A successful make
creates the executable xmovectrl.

	After building xmove, you should have two executables
(xmove and xmovectrl), plus a library depending upon compilation
choices. The executables should be installed in an appropriate
directory. The library must be placed in the directory specified
in xmove's Imakefile. Additionally, the man pages should be
placed in the standard man path.

	It is recommended that users additionally read the
documentation located in the doc subdirectory. Although the man
pages describe how to start xmove, an understanding of its
features and limitations is required in order to use it
effectively. Xmove is inherently limited by the fact that it must
deduce an application's desires by watching the bits it transmits
and receives, and that it must attempt to make new servers look
identical to the application's first server. Much has been done,
and much has yet to be done.


	We are extemely interested in your comments (constructive
criticism is always preferred 8). Even if you don't have much to
say, we'd like to hear from you, just to know whether people are
interested. If you experiment with xmove, we'd love to hear what
applications and configurations work, and which cause trouble.

	Please send all comments, bug reports (detailed, please!)
and suggestions for future enhancements to:

	ethan@cs.columbia.edu

	We will also attempt to monitor discussion on
comp.windows.x, but responses are only guaranteed through email.
	
	Support for xmove development has been provided by Daniel
Duchamp at Columbia University and by James Kempf and Dick
Sillman at Sun Microsystems.

	We hope you enjoy the product!

	Sincerely,
	Ethan Solomita
