Read carefully; this is the only documentation there is!

The paint program takes no paramaters.  It makes a connection to
$DISPLAY, and opens a window near the upper-left corner of the screen.

Paint is very modal.  There are keyboard commands to change the modes. 
Type the commands at the window on the X11 display.  The current mode
is displayed on stdout.  (I would like to display the current mode on
the X11 window, but I couldn't get fonts to work.)

Some of the keyboard commands take an integer argument.  To specify an
argument, type a number (with an optional minus sign) before the key
for the command.  Thus, to set line thickness to 72, type "72t".

a	Draw an arc.  When the user drags through a rectangle with the
mouse, an arc will be inscribed in that rectangle (from angle1 to angle2).

A	Draw a filled arc.  Same as above, but arc will be filled.

C	Clear the window.

f	Change the alu function.  This takes an argument from 0 to 15.

l	Draw lines.  When the user drags through the window, a line
will be drawn from where he presses the button to where he releases it.

p	Draw polygons.  Specify several points on the screen by
clicking with the left button.  Specify the last point with the right
button.  A polygon will be drawn connecting the points in order.  (This
isn't a real polygon; it won't automatically connect the first and last
points for you.  This is just a test for XLines().)

P	Draw filled polygons.  Same as above, but the polygon will be
filled.  (The first and last points are connected by the server.)

r	Draw a rectangle.  Drag through a rectangle, and the outline of
that rectangle will be drawn.

R	Draw a filled rectangle.  Same as above, but the rectangle is filled.

t	Change the thickness (a.k.a. "line width").  The line width is
set to the argument.

,	Set the value of angle1 to the argument.  The units are
degrees.  (This was supposed to be a '<', but because I have to work to
detect shifted characters, ',' was easier.)

.	Set the value of angle2 to the argument.  (As above, this was
supposed to be a '>'.)

Paint will also refresh itself on expose windows.  The code to do this
correctly with clipping rectangles is currently commented out.
