Here is a short guide on how to build and install xsession.

CONFIGURATION

  First, take a quick look at the file XSession.ad.  The lines belonging to the
  groups "Window managers menu items" and "Applications menu items" should be
  customized for your site; you should customize the "*lockCommand" resource,
  too.

  You will probably have to remove some window managers from the "wmNames" list
  (those that are not installed on your system).  If you don't understand the
  resources structure, you can read the manual page for more information.  You
  can read the manual page on-line before installing it with one of the
  following commands: nroff -man xsession.man | col | more
                      gnroff -man xsession.man | col | more

  This step is not absolutely necessary, but if you leave all window managers
  in the menu, the users will get errors when they try to run a window manager
  that is not available.


COMPILING AND INSTALLING XSESSION

  If you have `imake' and `xmkmf', you only need to customize the Imakefile
  for your site (see comments inside), then type
          xmkmf -a
          make
  to compile xsession, and type
          make install
          make install.man
  to install xsession, its application-defaults and its manual page.
  Note: some versions of `xmkmf' do not understand the `-a' option.  You can
  safely ignore it if you type `make depend' after `xmkmf'.

  If you don't have `imake' or `xmkmf', then you will need to customize a
  Makefile for your site.  The one provided, which is named Makefile.std, is
  documented and is as simple as possible.  You first have to change its name
  to Makefile, customize it, then type
	make
  to compile xsession, and type
	make install
	make install.man
  to install xsession, its application-defaults and its manual page.

  If you have `imake' and `xmkmf', please use them to create the Makefile;
  don't use Makefile.std!  The Makefile created by `imake' will be more
  suitable for your system than any other one.

  On some systems (Linux, AIX, Irix, ...), xsession must be setuid to root in
  order to be able to use the "console" option.  If you are installing
  xsession on one of those systems, you will have to execute these two
  commands on the installed binary:
	chown root xsession
	chmod 4711 xsession
  If you cannot (or may not) do this yourself, contact your administrator.
  Note: this will only work if xsession was compiled with the ENABLE_SUID
  symbol defined.  Otherwise, you won't be able to run it.  This is a security
  feature.

TESTING XSESSION

  If you cannot install the application-defaults file in the right place (i.e.
  the /usr/lib/X11/app-defaults directory) and you want to test xsession, you
  can use one of the following alternatives to make these defaults known to X
  Window (and so, to xsession):

  o Write a small shell script which sets the environment variable XENVIRONMENT
    to [...]/XSession.ad (where [...] is the right access path to the file) and
    then executes xsession itself.  Use this shell script to actually start
    xsession.  You can do it by hand, too.

  o If you have your own application-defaults directory, for example,
    ~/app-defaults, copy the XSession.ad file to this directory, with the name
    XSession, and write a small shell script which sets the environment
    variable XAPPLRESDIR to ~/app-defaults and then executes xsession itself.
    Use this shell script to actually start xsession.  You can do it by hand,
    too.

  o Add the following line to your .xinitrc or .xsession script
	xrdb -merge [...]/XSession.ad
    where [...] is the right access path to the file.
    Warning: modifying your resource manager in this way may cause some
    side effects on other X applications.  Use this for testing only.


BUG REPORTS

  Please send any problems/questions/bug-reports/enhancements to the
  authors:

          Raphael Quinet <quinet@montefiore.ulg.ac.be>
                         <quinet@stud.montefiore.ulg.ac.be>

          Alain Nissen   <nissen@montefiore.ulg.ac.be>
                         <nissen@stud.montefiore.ulg.ac.be>


COPYRIGHT

  Copyright (C) 1993, 1994, Alain Nissen & Raphael Quinet, University of Liege,
                                                                       Belgium.

  The X Consortium, and any party obtaining a copy of these files from the
  X Consortium, directly or indirectly, is granted, free of charge, a full and
  unrestricted irrevocable, world-wide, paid up, royalty-free, nonexclusive
  right and license to deal in this software and documentation files (the
  "Software"), including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify,
  merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software,
  and to permit persons who receive copies from any such party to do so.  This
  license includes without limitation a license to do the foregoing actions
  under any patents of the party supplying this software to the X Consortium.

  THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
  IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
  FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
  X CONSORTIUM, THE AUTHORS OR THE UNIVERSITY OF LIEGE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,
  DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR
  OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE
  OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

  The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
  all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
