Installation notes for GNUPLOT   --phr, Mon Jul 27 11:55:06 1987

This is version 1.1 of GNUPLOT from Villanova University, as modified
at MIT by Paul Rubin for the Athena project.

Differences from the Villanova distribution:

    1. An X window driver has been added.  Current source file is
    `xterm2.c'.  It is still being modified.

    2. Some changes had to be made in the order in which plot driver
    initialization routines, etc. were called, in order to make the
    X driver work.

    3. The documentation file has been converted from nroff to Texinfo.
    Texinfo, the GNU documentation format, is a simple Scribe-like
    language that can produce either printed manuals or tree-structured
    documentation files intended to be read using an Info browser.
    Generating an Info file is described in more detail below.  Printed
    manuals are produced from Texinfo files by running them through TeX
    with a special macro package called 'texinfo.tex'.

    4. The 'help' command has been rewritten to use the Info file generated
    from the gnuplot.texinfo file (described above).

Installing GNUPLOT:

    1. Edit the Makefile to reflect your system configuration.

    2. Edit file `plot.h' similarly.  The parameter HELP_INFO_FILE
    tells Gnuplot where to look for the Info file used by the 'help'
    command if you do not set your GNUHELP environment variable.
    Its default value is probably not what you want.

    3. Install the Info file 'docs/gnuplot.info' in the place you
    have specified with the HELP_INFO_FILE parameter.  See below
    for info on how to change the documentation.

    4. Type "make gnuplot".  That's it!

Changing the documentation:

    Do NOT, ever, edit the gnuplot.info file.  It is automatically
    generated from the gnuplot.texinfo file, and its last few lines
    contain absolute character numbers which if made incorrect will
    get the help system very confused.  Instead, edit the file
    gnuplot.texinfo.  The Texinfo Manual included with the GNU Emacs
    distribution explains Texinfo format in detail, but it is pretty
    straightforward.

    When you are through editing gnuplot.texinfo, convert the Texinfo
    file into an Info file by giving the Info command
	 M-x texinfo-format-buffer
    and then generate the Info tag table by giving the command
	 M-x Info-tagify
    (note the capital I in Info-tagify), and finally save the Info-ized
    file in 'gnuplot.info' (or wherever you have said in step 3, above).

    If you forget to run the Info-tagify command, you will get an Info
    file that the Emacs Info browser can read, but which the GNUPLOT
    'help' command, as currently written, doesn't know how to.  The
    help command should someday be replaced with an Info browser (see
    below) that is smarter about this.

    Note that you are out of luck with regard to generating a new Info
    file if you edit files with something other than GNU Emacs.
    Programs are being written at the GNU project that will allow you to
    do this without needing Emacs, but they are not finished yet.  A
    C-callable Info browser is also being written that should be merged
    into GNUPLOT in place of the current 'help' command when it becomes
    ready.
