.DA "1 March 1988"

.sp 10

.in +25
March 1, 1988
.in -25

.sp 2

Release 2 of Version 11 of the X Window System is brought to you by the
MIT X Consortium.  The X Consortium is a collection of industrial and
academic organizations, administered within the MIT Laboratory for
Computer Science, dedicated to providing continued technical leadership
for X, evolving the system to incorporate a wider range of graphics
capabilities, integrating support into more programming languages, and
developing better user interface technologies.  The X Consortium is open
to any organization.

I believe that you will find this release to be a solid base for
applications development.  Several new, fast servers are available in
this release, making development possible on a wide range of platforms.
The X Toolkit has received considerable review and redesign, and should
now provide a good base for building user interfaces.  In addition,
several other toolkits are available in the user-contributed software
distribution.

The Consortium is committed to producing standard, stable interfaces for
systems and applications development.  Both the core protocol
specification and the C Xlib interface are considered part of the X
standard.  The core protocol has not changed from the previous release;
the C Xlib interface has had changes to the Resource Manager routines as
a result of experience with the X Toolkit, but is otherwise compatible
with the previous release.

The X Toolkit Intrinsics are currently under review by the Consortium
for possible inclusion in the standard.  The CLX interface is in the
final stages of development, and will be reviewed by the Consortium in
the near future.  Development of a sample implementation of the proposed
X3D-PEX extension, supporting Phigs and Phigs+ functionality, is
underway; once the design has been validated, the extension will be
reviewed by the Consortium for possible inclusion in the standard.

This release would not have been possible without the hard work and long
hours put in by the MIT staff; my thanks to Jim Fulton of the MIT
Laboratory for Computer Science, Ralph Swick of MIT Project Athena and
Digital Equipment Corporation, and Ron Newman of MIT Project Athena.

.sp 2

.nf
.in +25
\'til the next release,
.sp 1
Bob Scheifler
Director, MIT X Consortium
MIT Laboratory for Computer Science
