
Introduction:
------------

This tape contains the final release of the Xray user interface toolbox.
If you have comments or questions regarding Xray, please contact Frank Hall 
at (503) 757-2000 or hp-pcd!frank.


Installation:
------------

The tape contains both source and object Xray.  The installation procedure 
consists of two steps:

	1) copying everything on this tape to your disc, and

	2) installing the object into your system.

If you have anything other than a HP 9000 series 300 with a topcat monitor,
please ignore step 2, as the object on this tape will not work on your system.


Step 1: Copying this tape onto your system.
------

Login as root and go to the directory you with to load the system.  Then type:

    "tcio -o /dev/rct | tar -xvf -"

This will load your system into that directory.  The release contains
two directories; src and usr.

Step 2: Installing the system.
------

While in this same directory, type:

    "tar -cf - usr | (cd /; tar -xf -)"

This will copy all the runtime files into the proper place on your root file
system.


NOTE: Building your own library
-----

If, as mentioned earlier, you are not running on an HP 9000, series 300
with a TOPCAT display, then you will need to compile the library for
your system.  This involves changing your working directory to the
following location (assuming you are still located in the directory
in which you unloaded the tape):

   cd src/Xray

The library can be compiled using the supplied make script.  There
are two ways of invoking the make script; the method you use will
depend upon whether you are running a system V or BSD kernel.  If using
a system V kernel, use the following command:

   make NOBSD<Return Key>

 If using a BSD kernel, use the following command:

    make <Return Key>

 Upon successful completion of the make script, a libXr.a file
 will reside in your current directory.  To use this library, you
 will need to copy the library to /usr/lib, using the following
 command:

    cp libXr.a /usr/lib

 Lastly, you may need to ranlib the library.  To do this, issue the
 following command:

     ranlib /usr/lib/libXr.a

 At this point, you are ready to use your new Xray library.


Sample .Xdefaults File:
-----------------------
       
A sample .Xdefaults file is included, which contains some default settings
for the Xray toolbox.  This resides in the 'src/Xray' directory, and has
the name: Xdefaults .  To use this, copy the Xdefaults file to your home
directory, and give it the following name: .Xdefaults .  Feel free to
customize this file to match your personal likes.
